---
permalink: /commutative-quandles/
title: "Structure theory of commutative quandles"
sitemap: false
redirect_from: 
---

## Abstract

In this blogpost, we describe an equivalence of categories between medial Latin (resp. commutative) quandles and affine modules over the ring of integral Laurent polynomials (resp. dyadic rationals). As an application, we obtain structure theorems for finitely generated commutative quandles and finite cancellative midpoint algebras. This solves two open problems of Bardakov and Elhamdadi in "Idempotents and Powers of Ideals in Quandle Rings" [\[arXiv:2601.07057\]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.07057).

## Introduction 

In the following, let \\(k:=\mathbb{Z}[\frac{1}{2}]\\) denote the ring of dyadic rationals.

## Prerequisites

First, we recall definitions Recall that a _magma_ is a set \\(X\)) equipped with a binary operation \\(\ast\colon X\to X\)). If \\(X,\ast_X\\) and \\(Y,\ast_Y\\) are magmas, then a function \\(f\colon X\to Y\\) is called a _magma homomorphism_ if \\(f(w\ast_X x)=f(w)\ast_Y f(x)\\) for all \\(w,x\in X\\). 

Let \\((X,\ast)\\) be a magma. For all \\(x\in X\\), consider the _right multiplication_ map \\(R_x\colon X\to X\\) given by \\(y\mapsto y\ast x\\) and the _left multiplication map_ \\(L_x\colon X\to X\\) given by \\(y\mapsto x\ast y\\).
* \\(X\\) is called _Latin_ or a _quasigroup_ if for all \\(x\in X\\), the multiplication maps \\(R_x\\) and \\(L_x\\) are permutations.
* \\(X\\) is called a _rack_ if for all \\(x\in X\\), the right multiplication map \\(R_x\\) is a magma automorphism.
* \\(X\\) is called _idempotent_ if \\(x\ast x=x\\) for all \\(x\in X\\).
* A _quandle_ is an idempotent rack.
* \\(X\\) is called _medial_ if \\(\ast\colon X\times X\to X\\) is a magma homomorphism; that is,\\[(w\ast x)\ast(y\ast z)=(w\ast y)\ast(x\ast z)\\] for all \\(w,x,y,z\in X\\). 
* \\(X\\) is called _commutative_ if \\(x\ast y=y\ast x\\) for all \\(x,y\in X\\).
* A _midpoint algebra_ is an idempotent medial commutative magma.
* \\(X\\) is called _cancellative_ if for all \\(x\in X\\), the left multiplication map \\(L_x\\) is injective.

## Commutative quandles

**Example.** Let \\(A\\) be a unital commutative ring in which \\(2\\\) is invertible, and let \\(M\\) be an \\(A\\)-module. Define a quandle operation on \\(M\\) by averaging: \\[x\ast y:=\frac{1}{2}(x+y).\\] Then \\( M_{\mathrm{avg}}:=(M,\ast) \\) is a commutative quandle called the _averaging quandle_ on \\(M\\). 

In particular, if \\(A=M=\mathbb{Z}/(2n+1)\mathbb{Z}\\) is the cyclic group of order \\(2n+1\\) with \\(n\geq 0\\), then we denote the averaging quandle by \\(C\_{2n+1}:=M\_{\mathrm{avg}}\\). Since \\(2^{-1}=n+1\\) in \\(M\\), this definition of \\(C_{2n+1}\\) coincides with the one from [\[BE24\]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.07057).

_Remark._ Averaging quandles are a special class of so-called _Alexander quandles_, which are not generally commutative.

**Example.** Given a set \\(X\\), consider the affine hull \\(H_X\\) of \\(X\\) as a subset of the free \\(k\\)-module \\(k[X]\\) generated by \\(X\\): \\[H_X:= \left\\{\sum^n_{i=1}\lambda_i x_i: n\geq 1,\, \lambda_i\in k,\, x_i\in X,\, \sum^n_{i=1}\lambda_i=1 \right\\}\subset k[X].\\] Then \\(H_X\\) is a subquandle of the averaging quandle \\( k[X]_{\mathrm{avg}}\\). We denote this subquandle by \\(\mathrm{Free}_X\\); if \\(\\# H=n<\infty\\), then we denote \\(\mathrm{Free}_n:=\mathrm{Free}_X\\). (Later, we show that \\(\mathrm{Free}_X\\) is isomorphic to the free commutative quandle generated by \\(X\\), which justifies the notation.) Note that \\(\mathrm{Free}_0\\) is the empty quandle.

**Lemma.** _For all \\(n\geq 1\\), the quandle \\(\mathrm{Free}\_n\\) is isomorphic to the averaging quandle \\( (k^{n-1})\_{\mathrm{avg}}\\)._

_Proof._ Denote the generators of \\(\mathrm{Free}\_n\\) by \\(\\{e_1,\dots,e_n\\}\\). Define maps  

$$
    \begin{aligned}
    \mathrm{Free}_n & \to (k^{n-1})_{\mathrm{avg}} \\
   \sum^n_{i=1}\lambda_i e_i &\mapsto (\lambda_1,\dots,\lambda_{n-1}) 
    \end{aligned}
    $$
    
and
    
$$
    \begin{aligned}
    (k^{n-1})_{\mathrm{avg}}&\to\mathrm{Free}_n  \\
   (\lambda_1,\dots,\lambda_{n-1}) &\mapsto \left(1-\sum^{n-1}_{i=1}\lambda_i \right)e_n + \sum^{n-1}_{i=1}\lambda_i e_i .
    \end{aligned}
    $$
    
The reader may verify that these maps are mutually inverse quandle homomorphisms. QED.

_Remark._ Contrary to Example 5.1(3) and Question 7.3 of [\[BE24\]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.07057), the subset \\(X:=\\{n/2^k \mid n,k\in\mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}\\}\subset k\\) is not a subquandle of \\(k\_{\mathrm{avg}}\\). Indeed, the right multiplication map \\( x\mapsto x\ast 1\\) does not restrict to a permutation of \\(X\\).

## Markdown guide

### Header three

#### Header four

##### Header five

###### Header six

## Structure theorems

**Theorem.** 

## Blockquotes

Single line blockquote:

> Quotes are cool.

## Tables

### Table 1

| Entry            | Item   |                                                              |
| --------         | ------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| [John Doe](#)    | 2016   | Description of the item in the list                          |
| [Jane Doe](#)    | 2019   | Description of the item in the list                          |
| [Doe Doe](#)     | 2022   | Description of the item in the list                          |

### Table 2

| Header1 | Header2 | Header3 |
|:--------|:-------:|--------:|
| cell1   | cell2   | cell3   |
| cell4   | ce
ll5   | cell6   |
|-----------------------------|
| cell1   | cell2   | cell3   |
| cell4   | cell5   | cell6   |
|=============================|
| Foot1   | Foot2   | Foot3   |

## Definition Lists

Definition List Title
:   Definition list division.

Startup
:   A startup company or startup is a company or temporary organization designed to search for a repeatable and scalable business model.

#dowork
:   Coined by Rob Dyrdek and his personal body guard Christopher "Big Black" Boykins, "Do Work" works as a self motivator, to motivating your friends.

Do It Live
:   I'll let Bill O'Reilly [explain](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O_HyZ5aW76c "We'll Do It Live") this one.

## Unordered Lists (Nested)

  * List item one 
      * List item one 
          * List item one
          * List item two
          * List item three
          * List item four
      * List item two
      * List item three
      * List item four
  * List item two
  * List item three
  * List item four

## Ordered List (Nested)

  1. List item one 
      1. List item one 
          1. List item one
          2. List item two
          3. List item three
          4. List item four
      2. List item two
      3. List item three
      4. List item four
  2. List item two
  3. List item three
  4. List item four

## Buttons

Make any link standout more when applying the `.btn` class.

## Notices

Basic notices or call-outs are supported using the following syntax:

```markdown
**Watch out!** You can also add notices by appending `{: .notice}` to the line following paragraph.
{: .notice}
```

which wil render as:

**Watch out!** You can also add notices by appending `{: .notice}` to the line following paragraph.
{: .notice}

### Footnotes

Footnotes can be useful for clarifying points in the text, or citing information.[^1] Markdown support numeric footnotes, as well as text as long as the values are unique.[^note]

```markdown
This is the regular text.[^1] This is more regular text.[^note]

[^1]: This is the footnote itself.
[^note]: This is another footnote.
```

[^1]: Such as this footnote.
[^note]: When using text for footnotes markers, no spaces are permitted in the name.

## HTML Tags

### Address Tag

<address>
  1 Infinite Loop<br /> Cupertino, CA 95014<br /> United States
</address>

### Anchor Tag (aka. Link)

This is an example of a [link](http://github.com "Github").

### Abbreviation Tag

The abbreviation CSS stands for "Cascading Style Sheets".

*[CSS]: Cascading Style Sheets

### Cite Tag

"Code is poetry." ---<cite>Automattic</cite>

### Code Tag

You will learn later on in these tests that `word-wrap: break-word;` will be your best friend.

You can also write larger blocks of code with syntax highlighting supported for some languages, such as Python:

```python
print('Hello World!')
```

or R:

```R
print("Hello World!", quote = FALSE)
```

### Strike Tag

This tag will let you <strike>strikeout text</strike>.

### Emphasize Tag

The emphasize tag should _italicize_ text.

### Insert Tag

This tag should denote <ins>inserted</ins> text.

### Keyboard Tag

This scarcely known tag emulates <kbd>keyboard text</kbd>, which is usually styled like the `<code>` tag.

### Preformatted Tag

This tag styles large blocks of code.

<pre>
.post-title {
  margin: 0 0 5px;
  font-weight: bold;
  font-size: 38px;
  line-height: 1.2;
  and here's a line of some really, really, really, really long text, just to see how the PRE tag handles it and to find out how it overflows;
}
</pre>

### Quote Tag

<q>Developers, developers, developers&#8230;</q> &#8211;Steve Ballmer

### Strong Tag

This tag shows **bold text**.

### Subscript Tag

Getting our science styling on with H<sub>2</sub>O, which should push the "2" down.

### Superscript Tag

Still sticking with science and Isaac Newton's E = MC<sup>2</sup>, which should lift the 2 up.

### Variable Tag

This allows you to denote <var>variables</var>.

***
**Footnotes**

The footnotes in the page will be returned following this line, return to the section on <a href="#footnotes">Markdown Footnotes</a>.
