---
title: 'Infinitely many McCoy rings with non-McCoy subrings'
sitemap: false
date: 2026-07-03
permalink: /blog/2026/mccoy-rings/
redirect_from: /mccoy/
tags:
  - rings-and-algebras
---

We construct an infinite family of McCoy rings containing subrings that are neither left nor right McCoy.

## 1. Introduction

A (unital associative) ring $R$ is called _left McCoy_ (resp. _right McCoy_) if, whenever $fg=0$ with $f,g\in R[x]$ nonzero, there exists a nonzero element $r\in R$ such that $rg=0$ (resp.\ $fr=0$). We say that $R$ is \emph{McCoy} if $R$ is both left McCoy and right McCoy. $$test_{test} test_{test} test_{test} test_{test}$$

The definition of \\(A(G)\\) may seem artificial, so let us discuss its motivation briefly. The aforementioned paper studies algebraic structures called _symmetric quandles_ or _quandles with good involutions,_ which are used to study surface-knots in \\(\mathbb{R}^4\\). A question of Taniguchi \[YT23\] seeks a characterization of good involutions of a given quandle. My paper studied this question for all quandles that embed into conjugation quandles \\(\mathrm{Conj}(K)\\) of groups \\(K\\), including all core quandles \\(\mathrm{Core}(G)\\) of groups \\(G\\). 

To study good involutions of \\(\mathrm{Core}(G)\\) (see \[LT25, Thm. 7.11\]), we pass to the conjugation quandle of the group \\(K:=(G\times G)\rtimes\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}\\), where \\(\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}\\) acts on \\(G\times G\\) by swapping coordinates. It turns out that \\(A(G)\\) is isomorphic to the center of the subgroup of \\(K\\) generated by elements of the form \\((g,g^{-1},1)\\); see \[LT25, Prop. 7.8\]. We exploit this fact to determine all good involutions of \\(\mathrm{Core}(G)\\) in terms of functions into \\(A(G)\\), and then we refine our result by replacing \\(A(G)\\) with \\(T(G)\\). Therefore, it were true that \\(A(G)=T(G)\\), then the proof could be streamlined. The result of this blogpost shows that this is not possible in general.

## 2. The example

Our example is the following group of order 16; see \[Cent\] for more information about this group. Let \\(G:=(D_4\times C_4)/C_2\\) be the central product of the dihedral group \\(D_4\\) of order eight and the cyclic group \\(C_4\\) of order four over a common cyclic central subgroup of order two: \\[G\cong\langle r,s,x\mid r^4=s^2=x^4=1,\; r^2=x^2,\; srs=r^{-1},\; rx=xr,\; sx=xs \rangle.\\] Here, \\(\langle r,s\rangle\cong D_4\\) and \\(Z(G)=\langle x\rangle\cong C_4\\). 

In the above presentation of \\(G\\), we have \\(x\notin T(G)=\langle x^2\rangle\cong C_2\\). We claim that \\(x\in A(G)\\). Indeed, let 
\\[g_1:= xr^3,\quad g_2:= s,\quad g_3:= 1,\quad g_4:= sr.\\] Then
\\[
g_1g_2^{-1}g_3g_4^{-1}= (xr^3)(s)(sr)=x
\\]
and
\\[
g_1^{-1}g_2g_3^{-1}g_4=(x^3r)(s)(sr)=x^3r^2=x^5=x,
\\]
as desired. QED.

_Remark._ In fact, we have \\(T(G)< A(G)=Z(G)\\) in this example.

## References

\[Cent\] _Central product of D8 and Z4,_ Groupprops, The Group Properties Wiki, [https://groupprops.subwiki.org/wiki/Central_product_of_D8_and_Z4](https://groupprops.subwiki.org/wiki/Central_product_of_D8_and_Z4). Accessed: 3-25-26.

\[LT25\] L. Ta. _Good involutions of conjugation subquandles_ (2025). Preprint, [arXiv:2505.08090](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.08090).

\[YT23\] Y. Taniguchi. [_Good involutions of generalized Alexander quandles,_](https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/10.1142/S0218216523500815) J. Knot Theory Ramifications **32** (2023), no. 12, Paper No. 2350081, 7. MR4688855
