---
title: 'On ranks of core quandles'
sitemap: true
date: 2026-01-26
permalink: /blog/2026/core-rank/
redirect_from: /core-rank/
tags:
  - racks-and-quandles
  - group-theory
---

In this blogpost, we provide infinitely many counterexamples to a conjecture of Bardakov and Fedoseev \[BF24\] about minimal generating sets of core quandles. Specifically, we show that \\(\mathrm{rank}(\mathrm{Core}(D_n))=4\\) for all \\(n\geq 2\\). The proof only uses elementary group theory, allowing us to forgo the more powerful results of Bergman \[Be21\].

## 1. Introduction

In 1982, Joyce \[Jo82\] and Matveev \[Ma82\] independently introduced nonassociative algebraic structures called _quandles_ to develop complete invariants of knots. Quandles are idempotent magmas such that every right multiplication map \\(y\mapsto y\ast x\\) is an automophism. Joyce introduced a particularly important class of involutory quandles called _core quandles_, which are groups equipped with the operation \\[g\ast h:= hg^{-1}h.\\] Core quandles were studied extensively in \[Be21, SB25\].

Given a quandle \\(Q\\) and a subset \\(X\subseteq Q\\), define the _subquandle generated by \\(X\\)_ to be the intersection of all subquandles of \\(Q\\) that contain \\(X\\). In analogy with groups, define the _rank_ of \\(Q\\) to be the minimal size of a subset that generates all of \\(Q\\). In 2024, Bardakov and Fedoseev \[BF24, Question 4.3\] posed the question of whether \\[\mathrm{rank}(\mathrm{Core}(G))=\mathrm{rank}(G)+1\\] for all groups \\(G\\). A deep theorem of Bergman \[Be21, Thm. 8.1\] from 2021 provides infinitely many counterexamples to this conjecture, but the proof is quite technical (though Bergman gives very helpful commentary around it). 

The purpose of this blogpost is to show by elementary means that the conjecture of Bardakov and Fedoseev has infinitely many counterexamples. Specifically, denote the dihedral group of order \\(2n\\) by \\[D_n=\langle r,s\mid r^n=1=s^2,\, rs=sr^{-1}\rangle,\\] so in particular \\(\mathrm{rank}(D_n)=2\\). We show the following.

**Theorem 1.1.** _For all integers \\(n\geq 2\\), we have \\(\mathrm{rank}(\mathrm{Core}(D_n))=4\\)._

_Remark 1.2._ Most of Theorem 1.1 can be deduced from the results of Bergman. Specifically, in the statement of \[Be21, Thm. 8.2\], we have \\(n=2\\) and \\(m=1\\), so \\(\mathrm{rank}(\mathrm{Core}(D_k))\leq 4\\) for all \\(k\geq 3\\). On the other hand, \[Be21, Thm. 8.1\] yields the bounds \\(\mathrm{rank}(\mathrm{Core}(D_k))\geq 4\\) for all even \\(k\geq 4\\) and \\(\mathrm{rank}(\mathrm{Core}(D_k))\geq 3\\) for all odd \\(k\geq 3\\).

## 2. Upper bound

First, we show that \\(\mathrm{rank}(\mathrm{Core}(D_n))\leq 4\\) for all \\(n\geq 2\\). Let \\(X\subset D_n\\) be the subset \\[X:=\\{e,r,s,sr\\},\\] and let \\(Q\\) be the subquandle of \\(\mathrm{Core}(D_n)\\) generated by \\(X\\). We show that \\(Q=D_n\\) as sets. 

Recall that elements \\(r^k\in D_n\\) are called _rotations,_ while elements elements \\(sr^k\in D_n\\) are called _reflections._ For all integers \\(k\\), note that \\[r^k\ast r^{k+1}=r^{k+2}.\\] Since \\(X\\) contains \\(e=r^0\\) and \\(r^1\\), induction on \\(k\\) shows that \\(Q\\) contains every rotation \\(r^k\in D_n\\). Moreover, \\[(sr^k)\ast(sr^{k+1})=sr^{k+2},\\] so a similar argument shows that \\(Q\\) contains every reflection \\(sr^k\in D_n\\). Hence, \\(Q=D_n\\).

## 3. Lower bound

Conversely, let \\(X\subset D_n\\) be a subset such that the subquandle \\(Q\\) generated by \\(X\\) is \\(\mathrm{Core}(D_n)\\). To show that \\(\\# X\geq 4\\), we show the following.

**Proposition 3.1.** _\\(X\\) contains at least two rotations and at least two reflections._

To prove Proposition 3.1, we begin with the following straightforward observation.

**Lemma 3.2.** _For all elements \\(g\in D_n\\) and integers \\(k\\), the element \\(g\ast r^k\in D_n\\) is a rotation, while \\(g\ast (sr^k)\\) is a reflection._

In particular, Lemma 3.2 shows that \\(X\\) must contain at least one rotation and one reflection. 

Suppose for the sake of contradiction that \\(X\\) contains only one reflection, say \\(sr^k\\). We claim that \\(sr^{k+1}\notin Q\\), which will contradict the assumption that \\(Q=D_n\\). Indeed, for every rotation \\(r^m\in D_n\\), we have \\[r^m\ast (sr^k)=sr^k r^{-m} sr^k = sr^{k-m}r^{-k}s=sr^{-m}s=r^m,\\] so \\(sr^k\\) acts trivially on rotations. Similarly, \\[(sr^k)\ast r^m = r^m sr^k r^m=sr^k,\\] so rotations act trivially on \\(sr^k\\). Of course, \\((sr^k)\ast(sr^k)=sr^k\\). It follows that \\(sr^k\\) acts trivially on \\(X\\) and vice versa, so \\(sr^{k+1}\\) either lies in the subquandle generated by rotations in \\(X\\) or does not lie in \\(Q\\). By Lemma 3.2, the latter must be true.

Now, suppose for the sake of contradiction that \\(X\\) contains only one rotation, say \\(r^k\\). Since \\(r^k\ast r^k=r^k\\), the above calculations show that \\(r^k\\) acts trivially on \\(X\\) and vice versa. Similarly to the conclusion of the previous paragraph, Lemma 3.2 implies that \\(r^{k+1}\notin Q\\), which is a contradiction. Hence, \\(X\\) contains at least two rotations and at least two reflections, which is what we needed to show. QED.

## References

\[BF24\] V. G. Bardakov and D. A. Fedoseev. _Products of quandles,_ Algebra Logic **63** (2024), no. 2, 75–97. MR4918447

\[Be21\] G. M. Bergman. _On core quandles of groups,_ Comm. Algebra **49** (2021), no. 6, 2516–2537. MR4255023

\[Jo82\] D. Joyce, _A classifying invariant of knots, the knot quandle,_ J. Pure Appl. Algebra **23** (1982), no. 1, 37–65. MR638121

\[Ma82\] S. V. Matveev, _Distributive groupoids in knot theory,_ Mat. Sb. (N.S.) **119**(161) (1982), no. 1, 78–88, 160. MR672410

\[SB25\] F. Spaggiari and M. Bonatto. _On core quandles,_ Algebra Universalis **86** (2025), no. 4, Paper No. 28, 18 pp. MR4951428
