---
title: 'Solution to a problem about central subgroups'
sitemap: true
date: 2026-03-25
permalink: /blog/2026/central-subgroups/
redirect_from: /central-subgroups/
tags:
  - racks-and-quandles
  - group-theory
---

In the paper "Good involutions of conjugation subquandles" \[LT25\], I posed a question about involutions in certain central subgroups of nonabelian groups. This very short blogpost answers that question in the positive. Our example is the central product \\((D_4\times C_4)/C_2\\), which has order 16. 

## 1. Introduction

The purpose of this blogpost is to give a positive answer to Problem 7.3 in my paper \[LT25\], which asks about a certain central subgroup \\(A(G)\\) of an arbitrary group \\(G\\). Namely, let \\(A(G)\\) be the set of central elements \\(a\in Z(G)\\) that satisfy the following property: There exist a positive integer \\(n\in\mathbb{Z}^+\\) and elements \\(g_1,\dots,g_{2n}\in G\\) such that \\[a=g_1g_2^{-1}g_3g_4^{-1}\cdots g_{2n-1}g_{2n}^{-1} = g_1^{-1}g_2g_3^{-1}g_4\cdots g_{2n-1}^{-1}g_{2n}.\\] On the other hand, let \\[T(G):=\\{z\in Z(G)\mid z^2=1\\}\\] be the subgroup of central involutions of \\(G\\). Note that \\(A(G)\\) is a subgroup of \\(Z(G)\\), and \\(T(G)\\) is a subgroup of \\(A(G)\\). Problem 7.3 asks whether there exists a group \\(G\\) such that \\(A\neq T\\). Note that if we require that \\(Z(G)\in\{G,T\}\\), then the problem has a negative answer.

The definition of \\(A(G)\\) may seem artificial, so let us discuss its motivation briefly. The aforementioned paper studies algebraic structures called _symmetric quandles_ or _quandles with good involutions,_ which are used to study surface-knots in \\(\mathbb{R}^4\\). A question of Taniguchi \[YT23\] seeks a characterization of good involutions of a given quandle. My paper studied this question for all quandles that embed into conjugation quandles \\(\mathrm{Conj}(K)\\) of groups \\(K\\), including all core quandles \\(\mathm{Core}(G)\\) of groups \\(G\\). 

To study good involutions of \\(\mathm{Core}(G)\\) (see \[LT25, Thm. 7.11\]), we pass to the conjugation quandle of the group \\(K:=(G\times G)\rtimes\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z},\\) where \\(\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}\\) acts on \\(G\times G\\) by swapping coordinates. It turns out that \\(A(G)\\) is isomorphic to the center of the subgroup of \\(K\\) generated by elements of the form \\((g,g^{-1},1)\\); see \[LT25, Prop. 7.8\]. We exploit this fact to determine all good involutions of \\(\mathm{Core}(G)\\) in terms of functions into \\(A(G)\\), and then we refine our result by replacing \\(A(G)\\) with \\(T(G)\\). Therefore, it were true that \\(A(G)=T(G)\\), then the proof could be significantly streamlined. The result of this blogpost shows that this is not possible in general.

## 2. The example

Our example is the following group of order 16; see \[Grou\] for more information about this group. Let \\(G:=(D_4\times C_4)/C_2\\) be the central product of the dihedral group \\(D_4\\) of order eight and the cyclic group \\(C_4\\) of order four over a common cyclic central subgroup of order two: \\[G\cong\langle r,s,x\mid r^4=s^2=x^4=1,\; r^2=x^2,\; srs=r^{-1},\; rx=xr,\; sx=xs \rangle.\\] Here, \\(\langle r,s\rangle\cong D_4\\) and \\(Z(G)=\langle x\rangle\cong C_4\\). 

In the above presentation of \\(G\\), we have \\(x\notin T(G)=\langle x^2\rangle\cong C_2\\). We claim that \\(x\in A(G)\\). Indeed, let 
\\[g_1\coloneq xr^3,\quad g_2\coloneq s,\quad g_3\coloneq 1,\quad g_4\coloneq sr.\\] Then
\\[
g_1g_2^{-1}g_3g_4^{-1}= (xr^3)(s)(sr)=x
\\]
and
\\[
g_1^{-1}g_2g_3^{-1}g_4=(x^3r)(s)(sr)=x^3r^2=x^5=x,
\\]
as desired. QED.

_Remark._ In fact, we have \\(T(G)< A(G)=Z(G)\\) in this example.

## References

\[Cent\] _Central product of D8 and Z4,_ Groupprops, https://groupprops.subwiki.org/wiki/Central_product_of_D8_and_Z4. Accessed: 3-25-26.

\[LT25\] L. Ta. _Good involutions of conjugation subquandles_ (2025). Preprint, [arXiv:2505.08090](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.08090).

\[YT23\] Y. Taniguchi. _Good involutions of generalized Alexander quandles,_ J. Knot Theory Ramifications **32** (2023), no. 12, Paper No. 2350081, 7. MR4688855
